since the great awokening of 2014 when
mainstream media Outlets began using
terms like systemic racism and white
supremacy what you would have predicted
is that black voters Hispanic voters
would be going to the Democratic side
and that perhaps white voters would be
going in the other direction what's
happened is Republicans have been doing
better and better with Black and
Hispanic voters it's embarrassing for
for for Democrats I don't think that
they understand it
[Music]
hello everybody I have the opportunity
today to talk with Coleman Hughes
Coleman has written a new book published
in 2024 called the end of race politics
Arguments for a colorblind America in
which he does exactly that to lay out
his case for a return I would say to the
classic civil rights attitude of the
1950s and early 1960s and that attitude
was
that individuals in society would be
best served if we used standards of
evaluation other than intrinsic group
oriented characteristics to Define
select promote and evaluate one another
and so what does that mean well it
definitely doesn't mean race ethnicity
sex gender mostly because all of those
attributes are actually irrelevant as
the classic civil Libertarians presumed
to complex job performance to
productivity to contribution to society
and so they shouldn't be considered when
making those sorts of evaluations and if
they are it's a detriment to the people
who are being selected by that means
even if it's in the service of some
hypothetical reparation and certainly to
society in that we should always select
the person who's best qualified for the
position in question we should always
select the person who can do the job in
the most efficient and effective
possible Manner and that's not for them
exactly even though that's beneficial to
them it's it's for everyone in our
important positions we want the best
people why so that we can ACR the
benefit of their ability it's is it
selfish well it is in a sense because
only in a sociological sense is because
Society works best when it's able when
everyone is able to reap the benefits of
the best in everyone and you don't
Define that racially and if you start to
do that you actually interfere with the
selection of excellence and so what did
we talk about today we talked about that
and it's a a crucial issue what does it
mean to be colorblind what neither
Coleman and I are naive enough to assume
that that's something that could be
attained easily people have a pronounced
ingroup what a pronounced proclivity to
ingroup favoritism and that can
certainly manifest itself in the form of
a very pathological racism and that's
something that has to be mitigated
against but the proper solution to that
the time honored solution the solution
that led to the emancipation of the
slaves was something approximating uh an
attempt to establish non-prejudicial
colorblindness and we're deviating from
that and we also discussed why so join
us for that well Mr Hughes it's been
about four years since we talked long
time uh especially now the whole world
has Twisted itself into a frenzy even
more over the last four years so why
don't we start just with an update like
tell me can you can you walk everybody
through what you've been doing over the
last four years and and what you're
doing now what your Ambitions are let's
position everyone so they understand
where you're coming from yeah so four
years ago uh I think you said we talked
in December 2020 I had just started my
podcast conversations with Coleman uh I
was still in the research phase of of my
book which is now finished and has been
out for a few months called the end of
race politics Arguments for a colorblind
America
um and I think the most press the most
pressing uh issue at that time was the
you know the aftermath of the George
Floyd riots um the the recent election
of of of Joe Biden and um you know the
the uh the tricky and eventually violent
transition between Biden and and
Trump so you know what I've been up to
in the in the intervening years I've
been releasing podcasts for four years
I've I've uh been going around talking
about the message of my book especially
this year I think some of your viewers
will probably have seen some of those
exchanges especially on The View with
sunny host where uh I I tried to have a
conversation about colorblindness and
race and was met with uh a pretty large
amount of hostility from one of the
hosts of that
show and um
and so that's really what I've been up
to this year is really just trying to
talk to as many people as possible about
My Philosophy around the issue of race
um I've also been you know talking to to
people like Joe Rogan and others who uh
with whom I don't see eye to eye on the
Israel Palestine issue and um and and
like everyone I've been following very
closely all of the uh 2024 election news
uh Biden and KLA Harris and more
recently Tim Walls and and all of that
so um I'm happy to talk about any and
all of those topics well let's start
with your your tour you you said you've
been touring around speaking tell me
about that first yeah so as you know
when you have a book come out um you
know you you you have a pretty punishing
grueling schedule of of talking um and
my schedule has been nothing like yours
have been over the years but I've gotten
to talk to a lot of different people um
you know from all over the political
Spectrum about the message of my book
which is that you know color blindness
is uh the best philosophy to take with
respect to racial identity in other
words you know you're a white guy uh I'm
Black and Hispanic but those are not the
features of our s that should ultimately
matter right what matters when talking
about Peterson is his qualities his
values uh his actions and likewise with
me and so uh our culture has become kind
of deranged on this issue especially on
the left uh which used to be the the
Bastion and actually the really the
founder of of color blindness as I
explained in my book chapter 2 I devote
to just a historical examination of
where this idea of color blindness comes
from there's been a false history
written that suggests that color
blindness came from conservatives and
even
reactionaries um and there's kind of a
uh a kind of subterfuge a trojan horse
for white supremacy this this has no
basis in in in fact in fact I in my book
I go all the way back to the 1860s to a
man named Wendell Phillips who was one
of the most prominent anti-slavery
activists uh of his era his nickname was
abolitions golden trumpet and he was the
ear person to mention the word
colorblind uh in the context of
advocating for what he called a
government color blind by which he meant
a government that cannot and does not
recognize race anywhere in the law as a
reason to discriminate between people so
that's where the idea of colorblindness
comes from and actually comes from the
most radical wing of the
abolitionists uh since the 1960s you see
in a process that began in the academy
with civil race uh critical race Theory
and since 2013 or 14 has
metastasized uh far more broadly on the
left uh into Elite leftwing institutions
that has Rewritten the history of color
blindness as if it's a uh a bad faith
idea coming from the the worst corners
of the far right um to the point where
as as an experiment right before I
started writing this book I just Googled
color blindness race because I wanted to
see what would come up
nine of the 10 links that came up were
all articles arguing why color blindness
is bad racist reactionary naive Etc and
the 10th was a Wikipedia page so um it's
there's been a very successful PR
campaign against the concept of
colorblindness to the point where you've
had celebrities that advoc advocate for
it have to walk it back and apologize
publicly and so forth and so my goal
with this book is to tell the truth
about the history of color blindness
where it came from to tell the logic
behind the principle why is it such a
good principle for a multi-racial
society why is it the only path forward
and uh that's been uh that's really been
my project for the past many
months modern people often ask
themselves why do I have to study
history well you're a historical
being you need to know who you are and
where you came from and why you think
the things you
think that's why you have to place
yourself in the proper
tradition I'm taking four of my esteemed
colleagues and you across the world oh
wow this is amazing to ReDiscover the
ways our ancient ancestors developed the
ideas that shaped modern society it was
a monument to Civic greatness to visit
the places where history was made that
is ash from the actual fires when the
Babylonians burn Jerusalem from
2500 years ago to walk the same roads We
are following the path of the
crucifixion and experience the same
[Music]
Wonder we are on the site of a
miracle what kind of resources can human
beings bring to a mysterious but
knowable
Universe science art Poli ICS all that
makes life
[Music]
wonderful and something new about the
world is
revealed let me comment on that from a
psychological and legal
perspective okay so I spent 20
years looking for markers for
psychological markers workers that would
predict
performance performance of managers
performance of students performance of
entrepreneurs performance of creative
people and then on the negative side
predictors of antisocial Behavior
criminality proclivity to alcohol
addiction and so forth okay and to as
part of that it was very practical
Enterprise a because what I wanted to do
was partly financially motivated and
partly motivated by curiosity
um I wanted to master the literature
pertaining to the description of
individuals so that they could be
optimally fitted for their
careers let's say or perhaps uh
optimally diagnosed and understood if
they
were manifesting signs of the kinds of
pathology that upset them and other
people typical clinical work now there's
quite a body of law around this
so imagine you're an employer and you
want to screen your potential employees
before you make them a job offer now you
should do that because you could make a
case that you should just assign jobs
randomly because that would be the most
unbiased way of doing it right if you
just accept all comers there's no
question about differentiation
discrimination Prejudice anything like
that but and so then might say well why
shouldn't you just hire people randomly
well there's a bunch of answers to that
is first thing is is that people
actually differ in their abilities and
their talents and their interests and so
it's in the interest of the person that
you're hiring as well as you not to be
mismatched to their job now one of the
ways you might match someone is by
General cognitive ability and you want
people of higher General cognitive
ability in jobs that require rapid
learning and quick
transformation because otherwise they
can't keep up and then you might say
well even if they can't keep up it's not
fair to deny them a job and the proper
response to that is well that means that
someone else will be doing their job and
that's hardly fair to them so for
example if I hire a manager who has none
of the attributes of a manager all that
means is he'll fail or she'll fail in
that job which is very painful for them
and it will also mean that they
compromise the performance of not only
everyone that works for them but
everyone that they're responsible to and
so there's just nothing in that that's
good you want to match the person to the
job okay so you can evaluate their
temperament you can evaluate their
General cognitive ability those are the
fastest and most efficient ways to make
a determination of ability Merit okay
now but the other thing that's
interesting is that Merit is actually
described in employment law so for
example if I want to hire you for a
position and I want to use a test to see
if you're suitable and by the way an
interview is such a test and not a very
good one because interviews are not
accurate they're very inaccurate unless
they're standardized and done by a group
so interviews are actually not without
their Prejudice so what I have to do is
I have to take the job and I have to
describe what it consists of and then I
have to demonstrate that there's a
statistical Rel and I have to have an
evaluation
structure for those aspects of the job
so say it's
quantitative um then I have to show that
my test is statistically associated with
those
outcomes so Merit in that case is
defined as the ability to perform
whatever the job happens to be and then
the acceptability of my screening
technology is dependent on my ability to
demonstrate a relationship between the
technology and the outcome so there's a
bunch of reasons for making this clear
because what that means in a sense is
that there's no difference between
defining a job and defining the Merit
that goes along with it because the what
the Merit is is the ability to do the
job and so if there's a job there's
something that needs to be done and if
you're meritorious you're better at
doing it then the tests you use have to
predict that now there's no IND there's
no indication whatsoever that attributes
such as race or ethnicity are relevant
contributors to any
job not not in and of
themselves so you can't screen on the
basis of race because race can't be
demonstrated to be relevant to the
outcome of the job now the radicals say
for example well if you're black you
should have a black physician because
only a black physician can understand
your lived experience and there's no
measure for that there's no
demonstration whatsoever that that's the
case no one's ever demonstrated that
even a little bit certainly not in a way
that a court would find acceptable and
compelling if someone used that criteria
for employment the reason I'm I'm
pointing this out is because in some
ways the psychological and the legal
communities had already addressed this
issue it's like you're actually legally
mandated to be race blind now
unfortunately there are now the law is
set up now essentially so that if you
hire anyone you're probably doing it
illegally you can be challenged no
matter what you do so I'll give you an
example of that so if I interviewed you
and you didn't get the job you could
take me to court by claiming that an
interview is not the most valid
currently available means for assessing
your suitability and as far as I know
there haven't been court cases of that
type but they would as far as I can tell
wi because the statistical evidence that
interviews unstructured interviews are
unreliable and not valid is extremely
strong
so so the reason I'm bringing that up is
because this issue of race blindness is
in some ways it's already embedded in
our legal and Psych in our legal
structures and our psychological
practices I can't evaluate you on the
basis of race because it's irrelevant to
your
performance so so how do you understand
the leftist objection to that yes so
you're exactly
right so so many important features of
the history get memory hold here here
and the one that pertains directly to
your point is the Civil Rights Act of
1964 this was the crowning achievement
of the Civil Rights Movement it was
thought over
bitterly uh at Congress I mean most of
the opponents at this time would have
been Southern Democrats um this is you
know before the the voting scenario and
the geographical scenario in America
rearranged itself
and uh this was as close to America has
ever come to enshrining color blindness
in the law what do I mean by that what I
mean is that when the Civil Rights Act
of 1964 was being debated on the senate
floor the the lead sponsor of the bill
famously said if a single word of this
act requires you to reverse discriminate
or practice affirmative action to
correct for
imbalances I will eat the entire Bill
Page by page on the senate floor that's
what the lead sponsor of the Civil
Rights Act of
1964 um said uh hu Hubert
Humphrey now and now if you actually
read the the text of the bill it's very
clear you just can't discriminate
against anyone for any reason and
nothing in the bill requires you to
reverse discriminate so 2 plus 2 that is
a colorblind bill right really that's
you know that's as colorblind as you're
going to get now how has it happened
that in the 50 60 years since then that
law has been interpreted by various uh
judicial decisions to essentially
require to effectively require a kind of
reverse discrimination in certain cases
right um the the the story of that is uh
well told in in Richard hania's book and
people can look to that if they want the
details but the intent of the Civil
Rights Act was to be a
colorblind uh you know it was to
enshrine color blindness in employment
law and it ended up over the decades
kind of pointing in a different
direction and that's one of the things
that I think people memory hold because
uh the progressive left has now long
abandoned color blindness and so it's an
embarrassment to that fact that the
entire Civil Rights Movement was
premised on it um so with respect to
this you know question of discrimination
this is this is some a question I get
quite often uh people ask Coleman is it
really that there are no situations in
life in which it is valid to racially
discriminate and the way I answer that
question is is this um if you imagine an
x- axis and a y- axis imagine four
quadrants on the x- axis you have Stakes
are you in a low stake situation
or a high stake situation a low stake
situation would be chatting with your
friend at a coffee shop right a high
stake situation would be um trying to
find someone who on an airplane who
you've just learned has a bomb right um
and now on the Y AIS uh you you can
picture information how much information
do you have right do you have lots of
information about someone because you
you've been you know talking to them or
hanging out with them for weeks or do
you have no information about someone is
this person a total stranger to you that
you can only size up by sight so if you
picture that three of those quadrants
are situations where you really do not
have a reason to racially discriminate
ever which is to say if you have lots of
information about someone this goes to
your point um if you know their uh
psychological traits if you've IQ tested
them if you've talked to them if you put
them through a series of battery tests
if you if you've seen them under all of
that information is way more useful to
you than knowing their race knowing
their race adds no extra information
because you've already got lots of
information right so right there that
eliminates two quadrants that that
eliminates both High information
quadrants now if you're in a situation
where you don't know somebody you're at
a coffee shop meeting a friend of a
friend for the first time very low
stakes but you don't know anything about
them well then
rather than judge them on the basis of
their race the smart thing to do is just
to get more information about them and
it's a low stake situation so you stand
to lose Nothing by doing that right have
a conversation with the person in 10
minutes you'll know more than you would
know merely from a racial
stereotype most of us live our lives in
those three quadrants and so there's not
a good reason to racially discriminate
now if you are in the fourth quadrant if
you're in a situation that is high
stakes when there's lives on the line
potentially and all you know is that say
there's a terrorist on this airplane who
intends to blow up the airplane well
then yeah it's it's valid to take race
into account because you've got you've
got no time uh and you can be pretty
sure that the person W with the bomb
doesn't look like uh like an old white
woman right so so so I'm not saying
there are no emergency situations in
which you you've got to you know not be
an idiot and uh pay attention to
stereotypes and likelihoods and and so
forth but the truth is most of us are
living our lives in the other three
quadrants 99.9% of the
time remember when your personal life
was actually personal the internet
changed all of that now every search
every click every tweet it's all out
there just waiting to be collected and
sold to the highest bidder in today's
digital age we are all public figures
whether we like it or not your online
footprint is your new public Persona and
it's it's time to take control of it
that's where expressvpn comes in they're
like your digital bouncer keeping the
prying eyes of data Brokers and hackers
at Bay how by hiding your IP address
that unique digital fingerprint that
screams here I am World hiding your IP
address makes it much more difficult for
data Brokers to monitor track and
monetize your private online activity
expressvpn also encrypts 100% of your
network traffic to keep your data safe
from hackers when you're on public Wi-Fi
the best part it's not rocket science
One Tap and you're protected across all
devices I use expressvpn because I'm not
a public figure nor do I want to be
expressvpn helps me keep my personal
life private protect your online privacy
today by visiting expressvpn.com Jordan
that's
expressvpn.com Jordan and you can get an
extra 3 months free expressvpn.com
Jordan so um from a statistical
perspective the and from a psychological
perspective the appropriate thing to do
as a industrial organizational
psychologist for example or forensic
psychologist is to take an approach
that's very much akin to the one that
you just described so the first thing is
is that people default to stereotypes
when there isn't any other information
that's how we actually think so when you
don't know you use a stereotype is it
accurate um it's more accurate than
nothing right and that would be
particularly the case in those high
stake situations that you describe with
regards to prediction so I could imagine
generating an equation to decide whether
I was going to hire someone imagine I
analyzed the performance of 200 people
and I threw in general cognitive ability
past work history and personality that'd
be a pretty good start I might want to
use some screeners of Psychopathology I
could also throw in gender and race now
what I would want to do is see if gender
and race sex and race sorry sex and race
I would want to see if they added
anything above and beyond those
additional hypothetically more
informative predictors and the general
answer to that almost the invariant
answer is no if
you if you can control for factors that
are more well defined and again that's
usually General cognitive ability and
personality then sex and race are
irrelevant it's not always the case but
it's virtually always the case and so
that means defaulting to sex or race
makes your
prediction uh worse now you also might
want to people might also want to
understand that we're also not only
doing this prediction for the sake of
the person who might be
employed so so like here's an example it
is the case that if we made admissions
to the ivy league universities race
blind that there would be an
overwhelming
proportion of Asians that would happen
very rapidly and you might say that's
unfair well it depends on how you define
unfair but I can tell you one thing that
it would produce see one of the things
we might assume is that Society itself
benefits when we can extract the maximum
value out of the most able people and so
it isn't it isn't exactly that we want
to admit people to Harvard because it's
good for the people who get admitted
it's that we want to admit the people
with the most potential because then we
can extract the highest possible value
from them socially across their lifespan
there's a huge see it's so interesting
to me that the argument is always from
the perspective of the student it's like
well that's something that has to be
taken into account but that's really
from a social perspective that's not the
fundamental point is you want to
allocate resources you want to allocate
scarce resources to those who will be
most productive with them and that's for
social benefit not not for the benefit
of the person even though they will also
benefit so now I I want to dig into
something else that you described I'm
going to take the side of the leftists
for this
inquiry so because I could say to you
well it's all well and good to promote
color blindness but it's practically
impossible and here are the reasons um
people are ethnocentric by Pro by their
innate proclivity which by which I mean
that we have a pronounced ingroup
preference so you know I am going to
favor my wife over other women I'm going
to favor my children over other children
I'm going to favor my family over other
families and I'm going to default on the
stereotypical level to people with my
ethnic and racial and economic
background and that's all true you know
like if you look at how people make snap
judgments overcoming that in-group
favoritism let's say is very difficult
now we also might ask whether we
actually want to overcome that right
because you might say well let's just
dispense within group favoritism but
what are you going to say that I
shouldn't prefer my children to other
people's children like that means you're
implying that I have enough care in me
to love the billion children of the
world as much as I love my own two
children
and my answer to that is well I don't
have that much time or energy and also
that if everyone loved their own
children that problem would be taken
care of so like we can't just dispense
within group favoritism and so the
leftists even if we think we might the
leftist might say well
your vision of a colorblind
perceptual Horizon is uh naive so there
are rejoinders to that but but I'd like
to hear what yours are so uh here's what
I would say to that first I totally
acknowledge uh human nature is what it
is and we are never going to and uh
probably shouldn't want to stamp out
every aspect of our animal nature
including tribalism um tribalism comes
in many forms it it comes in the
strongest form in a a a deep attachment
to your actual kin uh like I you know I
can't I I can pretend to care about your
sisters as much as my sisters but I
can't actually do it like I can say
those words but I I'm literally
incapable of it really so you know and
as I'm sure you
agree uh every every system that tries
to completely deny and rewrite human
nature fails spectacularly and creates
much more suffering uh than uh than
happiness so the question is how do we
deal with this aspect of human nature
tribalism in particular ethnic tribalism
that when uh when taken to an
extreme uh when when
watered and and uh allowed to grow tends
to cause some of the bloodiest and most
terrible outcomes that have happened o
over the course of human
history my answer to that is uh I guess
twofold one is we have to we have to use
culture to Tamp down on the worst
excesses of tribalism by that I mean we
have to make certain things taboo we
have to raise kids to think that it's
taboo to
express pure race hatred right by
maintaining that taboo you you Tamp down
on um you you create a clear sense for
kids growing up where the boundaries are
where you're not allowed to go and then
you combine that creation of a taboo
with the allowance of benign expressions
of it right and and you know if if you
think what do you mean what do you mean
by benign Expressions I mean that if you
go to a comedy club a lot of the comics
are going to make jokes about racial
stereotypes and if they're funny
everyone of every race is going to
receive it in in a good way right they
going to receive it as a joke uh you
know Dave Chappelle can make jokes about
how black Santa Claus would be showing
up late everywhere and you know because
of the way he says it and how he's
coming at it everyone can laugh at it
and and make light of differences
between uh ethnicities and cultures in a
way that's safe and fun and doesn't
actually lead to Intergroup strife and
the analogy here is something like
sports it's it's like clearly I think
this is a point you've made many times
clearly sports are a kind of substitute
for war um they they tap into you know
they tap into the exact kind of
psychological Machinery that that men
kind of have inbuilt for war but um you
know nobody dies at the end of it so
it's it's in way it's a kind of benign
release valve for that aspect of human
nature that polices the boundaries
between the benign version and the truly
destructive version and so I think
something like that has to be true for
right it highlights the distinction so I
guess you're saying in part it seems to
me Russell Peters is very good at that
too by the way yes right and he's always
making ethnic jokes and he he it's
interesting to watch his audiences
because he picks on every ethnic group
and if he ever misses any they feel left
out and it it's partly an opportunity
for the racial or the ethnic group to
indicate that they can take joke at
their own expense which is something
like an indication of their civilized
nature right I mean when when men get
together on a work crew one of the first
things they always do is poke the hell
out of each other to see if there's
anyone who can't take a joke and if
there is anyone who can't take a joke
they are viewed with extreme suspicion
immediately yeah and so it's interesting
that that benign expression of it's it's
like a it's sort of like the jokes that
people make about sexual impulses as
well so so the argument there is
something like I I think the argument
we're developing is something like
there's going to be an implicit tendency
towards well all sorts of things on the
instinctual level aggression lust
gluttony and and like this this
ethnocentrism or ingroup favoritism that
can spiral out into actual Prejudice and
there's no denying that there's no
escaping from its effects
comprehensively but we can use our own
cons cultural striving to mitigate
against that you know and that can be
very successful by the way when so I
lived in downtown Toronto when my kids
were little and we sent them to the
Local Schools only a block away and the
schools at that point in Canada hadn't
become entirely corrupted with
politically correct idiocy although some
of the writing was on the wall now
Toronto where I was was very very
ethnically and racially diverse and as
far as I could tell
as far as the kids were concerned that
was
irrelevant like we had got far enough in
Toronto we had actually got to the point
where people were colorblind it didn't
matter there the kids as far as I could
tell in the elementary and junior high
schools in particular this was even true
of the high schools that the kids were
at the Asians and the blacks and the and
the and the Caucasians they're they
weren't discriminating against one
another when it came to the
establishment of friendships it never
seemed to be an issue now that's changed
to some degree in Canada because we've
insisted on re importing the racial
tension that characterizes the United
States into Canada because we're jealous
of it I suppose or God only knows what
the reason is but that has disintegrated
to some degree in Toronto which is a
very sad thing to see so so the thing is
is you we have to accept that that
proclivity towards ethnocentrism is
going to be there axiomatically and that
that has to be mitigated against
culturally you know now wridge Adrien
wridge wrote a great book on uh
meritocracy and this is another thing
that's very much worth highlighting he'd
be a good person to talk to by the way
um
he he uh he pointed out the historical
alternatives to meritocracy so that
would be like colorblind colorblind
selection because you might say well the
alternative to meritocratic selection
which is going to produce some biases
and outcome um the alternative to that
might be something like the equity that
the radical leftists are chasing but
that isn't the case historically the
alternative to meritocracy has always
been twofold
Dynasty and and uh what's the other word
nepotism so so you know and I can see
this already happening let's say at the
Ivy League schools so when the
university start to dispense with
objective testing for selection criteria
like the SATs for example which are a
very classic example of a objective test
you might say well that gives everyone a
fighting chance but first of all it
doesn't because if you get into an Ivy
League school and you're not able you're
going to fail and that's not fun for you
or anyone else but but there's something
more immediate that's the case as well
um it starts to devolve into something
like who you know or what strings you
can pull and or what Stories being told
at the time because with in the absence
of objective data there's only
subjective decision making right and
then the manner in which the subjective
decision is made is dependent on all
sorts of things that immediately become
invisible now so it's generally the case
in societies that haven't managed to
produce objective testing criteria for
let's say admission to high stakes
institutions that it's who you know your
family background that's what it was
like at Harvard up until like 19
1960 right the average IQ at Harvard in
1960 was something like
105 which is just above average and the
reason for that was well it was a rich
young white people's club and you got in
because of your family like it was an
aristocracy so Harvard replaced an
aristocracy with a meritocracy before
they started Jer mandering the Jerry
mandering the selection criteria you
know the left just think well we'll get
rid of the objective test and we'll
we'll have Equity it's like no you won't
you'll have ideological selection
nepotism or or aristocracy that's that's
what'll come up and that's not good for
anyone not if you're trying to
facilitate Merit right so I want to
react to that but just before I do I
want to pick up on what you said about
raising kids in Toronto I grew up in a
very similar scenario I grew up in
Montclair New Jersey which is a very
diverse town and I had friends of every
race and I did not think of them as
belonging to a race right right I
literally just thought of them by their
first name and by their
attributes this is one of the profound
sources of Hope is that of all the
problems and flaws that humans are born
with for instance you know children
often have to be taught to share right
that's not something that comes
naturally
to one thing they're not born with is
actually a any kind of deep sense of
racial tribalism in particular kids
naturally uh play with other kids of
different races without a second thought
uh it's usually not until you get older
that the kind of racial tribal part of
human nature begins to show itself and
so uh color blindness is actually very
intuitive to kids this is one of the big
difference differences between my
message and the message uh you know
between my style of anti-racism if if
you if you will and the kind of
anti-racism on offer by Robin D'Angelo
ibram kendi Etc Robin D'Angelo her
message is that kids are essentially
born racist that they drink it in with
their mother's milk and it has to be
Stamped Out of them at a very young age
uh with
indoctrination and woke kindergarten to
quote the San Franc the actual San
Francisco program uh my view is that
actually kids are basically born with
the right itude about race which is to
say they don't care and the best thing
to do is to essentially reinforce that
by show show them you know Martin Luther
King's famous I Have a Dream speech once
a year on Dr King day and uh you know
live the value of of colorblindness that
you know you you don't need more than
that gentle hand with children um in
order to keep them on the on the right
track now I want to address your your
the second Point too about
meritocracy and uh the the the
impossibility of equal outcomes Thomas
Soul has spent a whole career proving
this every which way that you know equal
outcomes across the board are not on the
menu and once you once you admit that I
mean ju just consider the fact we live
in a Multicultural Society we celebrate
cultural diversity we believe that
cultures are different that's what
culture cultural diversity means
it's not possible to have different
cultures that all behave and execute the
same that's a contradiction right so Ju
Just on that alone we should admit that
we we have to even if everyone gets
treated equally there's going to be
different outcomes okay we haven't even
in America we haven't even achieved
equal outcomes between different white
ethnic groups which is to say if you
compare you know white people of Irish
Des to white people of Russian descent
to white people of Polish descent vastly
different outcomes across the board
that's because equal outcomes aren't on
the menu we have to focus on
meritocratic processes and and and so um
to your point you know at Harvard when
they they looked into this I think I
think in the the recent affirmative
action lawsuit it came out in Discovery
that something like 40% of white Harvard
students were either the children of
professors student athletes you know
arily at kind of expensive hard to
access sports like um uh you know uh
rowing and um or or otherwise the
children of donors right so that's a
huge that's a that actually surprised me
because my assumption like like yours
was that Harvard used to be like that
but they've kind of rained that in to a
significant degree not not nearly as
much as you'd think it turns out um so
you're right that the alternative to
this is is is nepotism you know I and I
think a lot of people worry that
meritocracy is going to hurt Black and
Hispanic students I think that's at the
core of a lot
of um a a lot of people on the left
worry about this so I want to give two
examples of uh ways in which it doesn't
in fact it helps so there was a study in
Broward count Broward County
Florida um where they I believe they had
uh gotten rid of universal IQ testing
for kids these are uh you know grade age
kids but pre-ol they'd gotten rid of IQ
testing uh and then they reinstituted it
and found that there were a lot of
gifted uh just naturally gifted but poor
Black and Hispanic kids that were not
going to be identified any other way
except for a universal IQ test and uh
you know my my mother was a perfect
example of this she she was born and
raised in the South Bronx at the time
where that was really one of the worst
neighborhoods to grow up in in the 60s
and 70s and she ended up going to
stent the the the highly selective uh
Public School specialized Public School
in New York City on the basis of a test
now I can guarantee you have growing up
in the kind of chaotic household where
she did uh um her you know her her
mother could couldn't read mother had a
third grade education crime all around
her drugs all around her there was no
way she was going to be able to do
extracurricular activities okay she
wasn't going to be uh in six or seven
different clubs she wasn't going to be
uh she wasn't going to have necessarily
the best essays written that written by
committee by a committee of parents and
tutors right really all she had was
basically her smarts she you know all
she had was a test of really her inner
intellectual
potential the ironic part about all of
these other aspects the the essays the
the uh Club memberships leadership
positions is that those favor privileged
kids more than the actual test does and
so I'll give one yes clearly yeah I'll
give one other example of this there was
a very interesting study uh out of Duke
University in the early
2010s where they looked at um they
essentially looked at what happens when
you admit a group of students under a
different regime of Standards okay and
they asked this question in the abstract
because obviously this is true of black
students that that quote unquote benefit
from affirmative action but it's also
true of Legacy admits it's also true of
of student athletes right so you can
actually study as an abstract phenomenon
how how do kids fa differently when
admitted under a different set of
standards and what they found is that
not only black students but also Legacy
admits also student athletes which is
how they knew it was an effect of being
admitted under a different regime of
Standards rather than say racism what
happens is that you had a very high
degree of attrition out of the Sciences
into the soft uh the soft majors and how
do they know this is because they asked
all the freshmen on day one what do you
plan to major in and they've got they
got something like you know 70 they got
a ton of black male students and black
female students interested in studying
the hard Sciences right everyone pretty
much had the same rate of being
interested in the hard Sciences but what
happened by year two by year three you
found all of those groups of kids
accepted under lower standards dropping
out going to easier majors and getting
superficially similar GPA so that if you
only look at GPA you actually don't see
the effect of admitting people under
lower standards and what happens is if
that s that black student that was
interested in being a chemistry an
engineering major at Duke if he had gone
to a college if he had not gotten into
Duke gone to a different College he
might have survived and gotten a pretty
good engineering degree at a pretty good
state school and went on to to become an
engineer instead just in just to survive
with the median of the class of kids
that were smarter than him he he got
some frankly sorry kind of BS degree
that he didn't want to get and now he's
not even an engineer so this is a very
real phenomenon and you know there's
really no there's no way of of of
there's no end run about around
meritocracy where you can have your cake
and eat it too without all of these
other consequences so two things on that
the first is if you're a parent you
don't want to send your kid to a
university where they're in the bottom
cortile of intellectual capacity now so
you could imagine if you go to Harvard
and you have an IQ of 120 you're pretty
smart but you're not smart compared to
someone with an IQ of 145 like you're
not in the same game and so you're going
to find exactly what you just described
is it's going to be a failing game for
you and that's not entertaining and it's
also not good for you and it's also not
realistic in a sense because like uh the
Harvard environment let's say in the
1990s cuz I don't know what it's like
now wasn't the real world right you're
bringing they have a tremendous capacity
to discriminate because they have so
many applicants and so even with the
Legacy students they can pick high IQ
Legacy students because they have so
many
applicants so so so then you go there
let's say with an IQ of 125 which puts
you at about 90th percentile or above
you're no dummy but you're at the bottom
of your class now you could go to a
decent state school and be in the top
that's better for you that's better for
you why would you put someone in a
position where they're likely to fail
and also get a the wrong impression of
their
abilities now it might mean that you
know if you're going to compete at the
upper echelons of any discipline let's
say you want to be a great scientist
you're going to need all things
considered you're going to need an IQ of
145 and you're going to need to work
flat out 80 hours a week and that's that
and so if you go to a state school and
you take a hard science degree you're
probably not going to hit that upper Eon
rung but that doesn't mean that there
isn't going to be all sorts of
opportunities available to you with that
degree and it's much better to be
positioned in the right place it's much
better to be positioned accurately with
regards to your comments on
U non-meritorious selection so I did a
study that we were never allowed to
publish at the naval Academy with like
4,500 people it took a long time to do
this study we gave them a full
comprehensive neuropsychological IQ and
personality battery and we could predict
military performance and academic
performance because we had those outcome
measures from the institution and they
preferentially admitted athletes not
least because Navy wants to beat Army in
the football game which is actually not
that big a priority when you're trying
to produce people who are going to be
piloting warships worth hundreds of
millions of dollars in very complex
situations and so you know maybe the
priorities there were a bit a skew and
so we had the opportunity to investigate
that and it was clearly the case that
people who were admitted on any basis
other than psychometric Merit performed
much more poorly in terms of the
evaluation criteria that the Naval
Academy themselves had used now the
argument from the radicals would be well
then the assessment criteria themselves
are prejudiced but that argument Falls
apart if you accept the idea that well
jobs have a quality and Merit you know
like if you're a linesman working for a
power company it seems reasonable for me
to evaluate you on
how effective you are at generating the
repairs that you do generate does
someone else have to go mop in after you
and then how many of those operations
can you perform per day it's like it's
the very definition of the job and to be
anti- Merit in a situation like that is
to make the simultaneous claim that jobs
have no content right there's no
hierarchy of ability within a job but
that means there's no job because the
hierarchy is there implicitly with the
job right there's a job when doing
something is deemed better than not
doing it and then there's a difference
you know wouldn't matter what the
competition is you could have
four-year-olds lay on the floor of the
gymnasium and roll horizontally towards
the other wall if you did that
repeatedly with a hundred of them you
build a hierarchy some kids would be
reliably faster and then you could
generate measures that would predict
which kids could roll faster they'd
probably be older and stronger for
example you know maybe they'd be more
competitive and motivated I don't know
what the criteria would be but if
there's any outcome you immediately
build a hierarchy of rank and then you
can derive tests that will predict it
that's essentially what meritocracy
boils down to and it it's not in
anybody's interest to demolish that I I
think um um Thomas Sol has a
great book called The Quest for Cosmic
Justice and uh I remember him saying in
that book that
meritocracy uh like
capitalism is a word that was actually
coined by its
enemies
and and and often when the enemies of
the idea coin the idea they frame it in
a way that is dishonest right so for
example you know capitalism right right
there in the word suggests that it's all
about you know Capital expanding itself
which seems totally disconnected from
you know labor for example and now if
you actually look into it you find every
time capitalism has been opposed to
Communism the workers from the Communist
Regime are fleeing banging on the doors
of the capitalist Society trying to get
in right so clearly there's something at
minimum flawed about that framing uh but
the word stuck meritocracy so pointed
out
uh implies that uh the testing regime is
a comment on your worth as an individual
your moral worth which it's really not
um if I do better on the SAT uh than you
that doesn't mean I'm a better person
all around all it means is that I'm
better at the tasks associated with this
sat which predict that I'm probably
going to do better than you at a
university on almost any subject I'm
going to do better than you at law
school and I'm probably going to do
better on the elsat it means that in in
in subset of life that has to do with
intellectual tasks problem solving quick
problem solving quick learning model
building I'm better at that than you
right that doesn't mean I'm a better
person than you okay it doesn't mean I'm
that's technically true you know because
the well if you look at the personality
attributes the two or three that you
would most associate let's say with
morality Like It's Tricky and there's
not a oneto one relationship and I'm not
implying that but generally speaking
people regard those who are
conscientious diligent hardworking
reliable industrious as moral now now
that's not the only dimension of
morality because you also have
agreeableness when and more people who
are more agreeable in our society at
least are also deemed more moral because
they're more caring they're more
empathic they're more polite and so you
could even see conscientiousness as the
conservative virtue and agreeableness as
the liberal virtue if you wanted to it
doesn't matter those are those are the
places where virtue seems to be captured
to some degree in the personality models
there's zero correlation with
like zero interesting right right so
technically yeah yeah well and so
another way and it's very important the
case that you're making to discriminate
intellectual capacity let's say or Merit
from moral worth because it's also the
case that the intelligent have their
Temptation right the the evil figures of
Mythology are always Stellar intellects
gone spectacularly wrong that's why it's
always the evil side scientist in the
modern mythologies right all the enemies
of the superheroes are evil scientists
they're all Evil Geniuses and that's
because to your point General cognitive
ability is not
only not associated with morality per se
it's also it's worse than that in a
sense I think Coleman
because it is definitely the case that
higher General cognitive ability confers
upon you a tremendous advantage in a
complex society cuz you can learn faster
and the differences are not trivial
there're it's the biggest s single
difference between people is General
cognitive ability and it's an appalling
literature to familiarize yourself with
to some degree because it does seem to
violate the
principles on first glance of universal
Cosmic Justice it's like why is it fair
for some people to be born with an IQ of
85 which barely makes you competent even
to be a member of the Armed Force forces
regardless of what role you're in or to
have an IQ of 145 which opens the doors
let's say to places like Harvard and and
Investment Banking as a career strategy
and it's an AR it's the the cards are
dealt out in a relatively arbitrary way
well that's a very bitter pill to
swallow but it is also the case that
those who are intelligent have the
temptation of Lucifer essentially if you
think about it mythologically because
it's very easy to worship your own
intellect and then to worship intellect
per se and that's a very very dangerous
that's a very dangerous thing to do to
to develop that set of that sense of
wound wounded intellectual Pride if
people aren't bowing at your feet or
even the presumption that merely because
you've been gifted with intelligence
because it's not something you earn
that means that you're of Stellar moral
character that's simply no I was really
shocked in my clinical practice you you
know with this quite regularly because I
had some people in my practice who were
definitely in the lower quintile of
intelligence let's say very very
impaired unable to read certainly unable
to use a computer um virtually
unemployable regardless of how much
effort was poured into that um yet often
unbelievably admirable in their ability
to Bear up under the complex and
stressful conditions of their life
without being bitter or resentful while
still being of service to other people
it was really shocking to me to watch
that you know and and and a reminder
that just because you're intelligent
doesn't mean you're good and that does
we do in our culture and the leftists
are particularly egregious in this
regard I would say to
casually
elude General cognitive ability with
moral worth I you know if you have a
materialist Viewpoint that's a very easy
thing to do it's very easy thing to do
it's a hard thing to fight against but
it's it's a pernicious problem I have a
question for you you you said and I
think it's right and I feel it too that
observing the vast difference between
the intellectual skills people are born
with is a bitter pill to swallow and
that the more you learn about it the
more you despair at the unfairness of
the universe in some way I'm curious do
you think that I share that reaction do
you think that reaction
is a a natural consequence of learning
about that or do you think it's only
because we have some deep Western
background assumptions about
fairness like do you think that that
would strike a pre- western tribe as
unfair as well as a bitter pill to
swallow or do you think it's really a
function of
some deep kind of assumptions we have
well okay well I think there's a couple
of things going on there the first is
that our society does differentially
award people with high General cognitive
ability because our society is very
complex and rapidly changing and so in a
societ in a traditional Society where
roles remain unchanged for Generations
IQ is much less
relevant so but in our society because
look how
fast do you have to be to stay among
those who aren't at least 5 years behind
the computational
revolution like you have to what have an
IQ of 95th percentile to be anywhere
near the bleeding
edge because things are changing so
quickly you know so so we
differentially devote resources to the
cognitively skilled and our culture is
set up so that that's more and more the
case but then there's another issue too
that I think's equally relevant you see
the worship of in of the intellect in
and of
itself has a has this danger of Pride
that's associated with it and it's a
very big danger so the way we should be
conceptualizing intelligence is the
manner in which gifts are portrayed in
the gospel accounts for example so one
of the things Christ says two things
that are in some ways cont ictory one of
them is that to those who have
everything more will be
given and from those who have nothing
everything will be
taken okay so that's the Matthew
principle that's what the economists
call it and it is a pointer to the fact
that
resources acre regardless of the
discipline resources acre in the hands
of a few doesn't matter what the
discipline is it's and that's what Marx
observed when he said that capital would
acre in the hands of fewer and fewer
people now that's true it happens all
the time it happens in every society and
it doesn't matter whether it's a
capitalist Society or a socialist
society by the way and so he attributed
that to capitalism which meant he
misdiagnosed the problem because it's
way deeper than capitalism but it is the
case that rewards are differentially
distributed okay and that those in the
higher echelons of the cognitive
distribution are more likely to acre
those rewards but there's another
statement there that's also relevant
which is that to those who have been
given much much will be
required and so this is a very useful
thing to know so like I had clients in
my clinical practice who were very
creative now that's a also an innate
proclivity so creative
people they have a wide ideational space
so one idea is likely for them to remind
them of many other ideas and many distal
ideas and they tend to be rapid at
generating such ideas and that's
probably something as fundamentally
biological as threshold for
co-activation of of adjoining neurons
right it's it's that low level okay now
so let's say you're gifted with
creativity now let's say that you
don't exercise that responsibly you
don't pursue your
creative Mission it turns into your
enemy like a gift that you misuse turns
into your enemy and it and this is more
to the Justice elements like you might
be rewarded like your IQ is Stellar you
wouldn't have accomplished what you've
accomplished so far had that not been
the case and you've been successful in
multiple different Enterprises and so
you know thank your lucky stars okay
does that make you privileged absolutely
does it make you unfairly privileged it
depends on what you do with it like if
you bore a responsibility that was
commensurate with the talent then you've
paid
existentially for your gift and the the
warning the classical warning in deep
religious texts is that if you misuse a
gift that you've been granted it will
become an unbearable burden and turn
itself against you and like I had plenty
of people in my clinical practice who
were they call them let's say
Underachievers you know IQ of 140 and uh
a 20th percentile social class position
that's a recipe for extreme bitterness
many of the people who I had in my
practice who were like that were
unbelievably annoyed that the world
hadn't bent itself over to bow at their
feet because of their undeniable
intellect and God the internet is
crowded with people like that I mean
that's what's that sitcom about the
physicists U The Big Bang
Theory all the humor that went along
with the big bang theory was essentially
at the expense of arrogant but socially
dysfunctional
intellectuals so so there is a Justice
this is what I'm pointing to Independent
of the relationship between your
intelligence and your social positioning
which looks unjust as hell there's
another form of Justice in operation
which is if you're smart you better
learn to be humble and you better learn
to be grateful for the fact that you've
been gifted and you better take that on
as a serious responsibility like a
serious moral responsibility cuz if you
don't it will work against you and if
you're super smart and your intellect is
working against you you are in serious
trouble so that's where I see the
Justice element of that so okay so
you're when did your book launch my book
came out in
February and how's it doing it's doing
well my Publishers seem happy um I'm I'm
happy with the response I you know I
frankly got I got more of a response to
it than I was anticipating so I count
that as a huge
success okay so in what way did you get
a bigger response and what's been the
varieties of the response I mean and I
guess I'm curious
about well you know you're one of the
you're a
rare you're a rare figure politically in
some ways I suppose in some manners akin
to Tomas Soul which is a good mantle to
to have to be cloaked in for sure but
like what what's the most effective
criticism would you say of the positions
that you've taken if you had to steal
man the people who are opposed to the
notion of colorblindness I I want to add
one thing to that you know James Lindsay
who's not very fond of the Communists
says all the time and this goes to the
radical leftists that it's always about
the revolution you know and so the
attack on meritocracy let's say and the
attack on color blindness and I believe
this to be the case is just another way
of furthering the kind of race
Consciousness that can be transformed
into the kind of class Consciousness
that can further the anti-patriarchal
and anti- capitalist Revolution and so I
don't believe that people like ibam
kendi and Robin D'Angelo are that much
concerned at all about um fostering
better relationships between the race
they're just
using the enhancement of race
Consciousness as a adjunct to what Marx
was trying to do when he tried to Foster
class Consciousness so that you know the
re the Glorious Revolution can proed and
you know you have to break some eggs to
make an omelet as the Communists are so
much inclined to say and if people
are disunited in their racial identity
but that furthers the revolution well
you
know doesn't matter because the Utopia
is forthcoming and so that's what that's
what I see fundamentally motivating the
people who oppose the idea of
colorblindness like of course it's a
it's a difficult goal I mean it's very
difficult to bring diverse people into a
union obviously and you also pointed to
something very interesting that's
paradoxical in the leftist formulation
it's like okay it's diversity
inclusivity and Equity well let's just
toss Equity out of or let's just toss
inclusivity out of the equation for a
moment
diversity and
Equity well how do those go together
this was your point I see so we're going
to be maximally different
and we're going to celebrate that but
all the differences between us are going
to be eradicated and we're going to do
those both at the same time that's the
theory that's your
theory you know it's no it's it's funny
when you put it that way I mean it's
it's it really is directly contradictory
I want to pick up on on what you said
here um that James Lindsay and and I
mean the point that I hear you making is
about pretexts I mean often in life we
think we're doing one thing for one
reason but we're actually doing it for a
totally different reason and often that
other reason is
unflattering um you know we claim to be
do doing something out of moral concern
but it's very quickly revealed with two
seconds of thought to be coming from
Envy or Revenge I mean this is like
human psychology oneon-one is that
sometimes we're even blind to our own
pretexts so more and more I I I think
about political projects as pretextual
uh because the the the contradictions
you know so often reveal themselves so
for for example um ibram kendi is you
know his whole book is about equal
results and uh the idea that you know if
black people are 133% of the population
black people should be 133% of people in
prison and no more 133% of the wealth
13% of the teachers 13% of the nurses
133% of every single domain you and he
he is apparently very consistent about
this and uh um and that's his worldview
okay so putting putting that to the side
take it at face value why is it that
someone like him and uh the people he
disagrees with have never once and I
really mean never once highlighted all
the domains in which white am Americans
are underrepresented in good things or
are or over represented in bad things so
for example suicide no small issue white
Americans much more likely to die of
suicide than black Americans um in my
alcoholism too alcoholism and drunk
driving in my in my book I list nine
different diseases that white people are
more likely to die of now is my point
that white people are on the whole worse
off than black people no that's a total
it's nothing to do with what I'm saying
what what I'm saying is that if your
philosophy at a deep level were about
equal results for equal races then you
would expect someone like him to
highlight those disparities as well
right if it were about disparity as such
now understanding that so much of human
behavior is a pretext for more base
motives what does it tell you that they
only ever care about the disparity that
black people are on the worst end of I
think that the whole
Equity uh uh campaign is a pretext for
what is at base just you know black and
brown identity
politics that that's all it is it's it's
my group it's I like my group and I want
us to advance to equal or even greater
than other groups it's it's I think it's
worse than that Coleman I think it's
worse I think when we're speaking about
pretexts like there are layers of
pretext and I I think it's and I'm
interested in your view I think it's I'm
going to make a case that I like my
group better because that's to my
advantage and I can cover that Advantage
by claiming um what would you say moral
superiority as an avatar of my racial
Community that's right so it's like yeah
it's my race first but not really it's
me see I see this with the activist
types all the time it's like the trans
Community well first of all no it's not
a community by any stretch of the
imagination by any standards and you're
actually not a representative you're
just happen to be a member of that group
and no one's given you the power to do
the negotiating or the speaking on
behalf of your community and you're
clearly doing it only for your own
narcissistic Advantage you know and this
is a very complicated thing to sort
through right because that that
rejoinder could be thrown back at either
of us you know I could say well the
reason that you're promoting color
blindness is because you have a book and
now you're on this podcast you're you
know sawing the fiddle with regards to
the sales of your book and it's all
about you it's a very dismal worldview
to assume that all human motivation can
be boiled down to you know narrow
self aggrandisement and I I certainly
don't think it's true any regard but
it's definitely the case that much of
what we see that's political is a
pretext for something that's deeper and
I'm at the deepest levels too I think
it's not only
self-aggrandisement that's at the root
of let's say the demand for Equity it's
also an envy and resentment that's
rapacious Beyond Comprehension there's
no satisfying that demand I mean all you
have to do is think about it technically
for a minute it's like
okay apart from the issues you brought
up right which is that there's all sorts
of situations like the feminists never
complain about the dir of women in Brick
laying for example it's always the sea
suite and so so you just see that
everywhere it's like okay well how black
do you have to be before the equity
distribution kicks in like and and what
are we going to do are we going to are
we going to DNA test
everyone I think my wife is three %
African-American I can't remember if
that's the case it's something like she
she's more black than Elizabeth Warren
was Native American when she claimed to
be Native American well well there you
there there well but but you know that
begs the question is like well is this a
genetic identity and if it's not a
genetic identity well is it one you can
just adopt that's the Rachel what was
her name donil doal problem doelle
doelle right right it's like well if
it's not if it's racial is it genetic
and if it's not genetic is it cultural
and of course the leftists insist that
everything is cultural so how the hell
do you define black and the answer is
well it doesn't matter because that's
not the issue right the fact that that
leads to all sorts of logical
contradictions and could never be
implemented is completely irrelevant to
the to the game that's to the power game
that's being played no and so how do you
know how do you know let let's let's
take that apart you can ask me too like
how do you know that you're not doing
exactly what you accuse in some ways you
accuse dangelo and kendi of doing like
you know you're you've been successful
for quite a long time and you've been
successful in part because you focused
on racial issues
now so that's what the harshest of
critics could say and I'm sure that's
sort of thing has been said to you like
how do you
personally it's very worthwhile to be
attuned to your own shortcomings
absolutely and to not note that there's
good rationale for your there's always a
rationalization at hand to put a moral
gloss on your comparative success it's
like what what do you have do you think
in check that helps
you stay on the straight narrow path y
so I think the the only way you can
really tell uh from the outside is
whether someone sticks to their
positions when it doesn't benefit them
and this is what you can say I mean this
is the what separates someone Like
Bernie Sanders he's the quintessential
example of this from many people that
hold his position is whatever you want
to say about Bernie Sanders he could be
a total total Satan in in your worldview
he was saying all the things he was
saying today when it benefited him not
at all when when really all all it all
you know decades ago he was just such a
such an
outlier that um he really saw very
little benefit politically and uh from
what he was saying and he just continued
saying it right uh whereas you know
virtual you know someone like kamla
Harris you know nobody knows what she
actually thinks because she has
flip-flopped on every issue just in the
past month she was against the death
penalty then she was for it and then she
you know so she seems much more like an
empty vessel who will say whatever she
has to say to get to the next rung uh
and many politicians are like that I
don't mean to single out Comm Harris but
you know what I can say for myself and I
think any of my close friends would
vouch for this is before I had any
public profile before I was a writer uh
of any kind I was annoying My Friends by
talking about these same issues when all
it did was like get me a reputation for
being the uh well frankly at Columbia it
got me a reputation for being some kind
of right-winger which I I never have
been so when when it was only really a
minus in my life I still represented
what I believed uh 100% And of course
from the outside there's no way to
verify that but it's true so well
there's some there's some ways there is
some ways of verifying that because you
know we could look into the details of
your autobiographical history and I
think you have put your finger on on
something that's relevant I mean one of
the ways we do evaluate people for their
moral propriety reliability is their
consistency during times of distress you
know and so so what I would say for
myself this is a relevant dat to discuss
this because the Supreme Court of Canada
just ruled against me today in
relationship to my battle with the
College of psychologists I mean The
Stance I've
taken what's happened to me is that vast
fields of opportunity have emerged for
me over the last six years now I like to
think I laid the ground work for that
for like 30 years beforehand but it's
still the case um but you know I my job
at the University became impossible and
I lost my clinical practice and that was
quite sudden and you know that so do I
believe what I'm saying well I believed
what I was saying enough to put that on
the line right and I could have backed
off although not really but in principle
I could have backed off so you're saying
it's something like I think this is
right it's something like the cost of
the sacrifice that's associated with the
views this is another problem with
casual activism you know because if you
agitate for something and it happens and
goes cataclysmically wrong you you don't
pay the price for that the people whose
lives you
were messing about with pay the price
for that and so that false ideological
activism that's a pretext let's say
doesn't come along with any commensurate
cost
it it just gives you the advantage of
appearing moral in the moment and I
guess I mean I think the conservative
thinkers have thought about that more in
terms of skin in the game right is that
if you're not risking something for your
view
then legitimate questions about the
rationale for your view can be raised H
speaking about the view let's talk about
what happened to you when you went on
The View so walk us through that story a
little bit yeah so I was I was asked to
appear on The View which is not a show
that would be friendly to my perspective
at least in my
assumption um and I went on there and I
had a good exchange with whoopy Goldberg
where we disagreed
respectfully um and then Sunny
htin uh who you know she essentially
asked me kind of accused me of this very
question she said um um you know a lot
of people say that you basically been
co-opted by the far right and uh what do
you have to say about that and and
obviously her her way of distancing
herself from the the opinion she was
dist distancing herself from opinion
that she actually held
but and I I I think the reason it went
viral is because I responded in a calm
and fact-based way to what was just an
evidence-free attack my character right
like there's there's no evidence I've
been co-opted by the right um there's no
evidence that I'm getting Coke money
pumped into my bank account uh in
exchange for saying the things that I'm
saying and as I as I pointed out to you
you know everyone who who who knew me
years before I had any inkling of Fame
knew that I was the kind of person to
hold these kinds of views
privately um when it was very unpopular
to do so so uh so I just pointed that
out and I think you know the it was the
contrast between her deranged
evidence-free character attack her very
cable newsy click baity um you know uh
character assassination and my calm
substantive answer that's something you
don't see very often on Prime Time
television and just that contrast I
think uh went so viral that people were
coming up to me on the street
consistently for for like two months uh
having seen that clip sorry and then the
other funny aspect I think is that she
offhandedly claimed that she you know
knew Martin Luther King's Daughter which
I imagine is true um and that therefore
she had more kind of deeper insight into
MLK's message than me uh which is it's a
total non Secor of course and she she
got Martin Luther King's views all kinds
of wrong in ways that I pointed out but
I think people found that
humorous well we could go back to that
issue of color blindness and and to
Toronto I mean it was a lovely thing as
far as I was concerned to see that that
characterized Toronto and at that time
so let's say that was 15 years ago 10 to
15 years ago that was sort of emblematic
of Canada like we'd actually done a
pretty damn successful job of that I
mean there
not 100% but pretty good and really good
in Toronto and it's really been
saddening to see that disappear and it
has raised the question for me is well
why would you want to disrupt that and
if the goal is well o the overthrow of
the oppressive patriarchy and the
freeing of the victims then any movement
I think it's the same thing that
happened to the bloody Communists when
capitalism that terrible word when the
free market Endeavor turned out to
actually reward productive workers
effectively enough so they moved out of
the class of poty I mean Henry Ford did
a stellar job of that right he
famously overpaid his line workers he
paid them enough so they could buy the
cars they were producing and I mean you
could hardly accuse Henry Ford of being
anything other than a capitalist because
you know by the leftist definition he
certainly was and what happened as the
free market systems expanded was that
the poor got a lot richer the working
class the productive working class got a
lot richer now the rich got a lot richer
too and
the difference in wealth distribution
remained relatively constant but it's
definitely the case that no other system
than the free market system Has Lifted
people out of poverty that's kind of
rough on the Communists because it makes
it harder to develop that kind of class
Consciousness that would motivate the
Revolution and switching that to the
racial side well that's pretty good or
the sex side or the ethnicity or gender
side it just opens up all sorts of new
axes for the Revolutionary spirit and
it's a very effective move I think
there's a similar Dynamic going on right
now between the Republican party and the
Democrat Party uh which is to say you
know since the great awokening of 2014
when uh mainstream media Outlets began
using terms like systemic racism and
white supremacy tfold 20
fold what they had been for the previous
many many decades uh since the
phenomenon of woke social justice Etc
what you've seen it you know what if
you're on the left what you would have
predicted is
that uh black voters Hispanic voters
would be
going even more to to to the Democratic
side and that perhaps white voters would
be going in the other direction what's
happened is strangely the exact opposite
which is to say in the past eight
years uh Republicans have been doing
better and better with Black and
Hispanic voters there is now no one
serious who denies that that is a trend
you can argue over how big the trend is
but you actually can't argue that it's
not a trend the reason that Joe Biden
beat Donald Trump in
2020 was not because he did better with
um Black and Hispanic voters it was
because he won a lot of white voters
from Donald Trump so so really white
voters were especially women yeah um and
and even even white men in some in some
places so but but this is fundamentally
I mean similar to your point about where
workers actually vote with their feet in
situations of communism versus
capitalism there's something there's
something very counternarrative
happening in terms of just who people
are voting for right it's and it's I
think it's it's embarrassing for for for
Democrats I don't think that they
understand it um it doesn't match their
model of uh political
science and um it's you know I mean so
the question is why is that happening
right okay so let let's do this because
we're running out of steam and time here
on the YouTube side let's Reserve our
discussion of the political situation in
the US for the daily wire side cool so
yeah we can spend half an hour talking
about that and for everybody who's
watching and listening you could turn
your attention to that additional
segment of this podcast for that
discussion because that is something I
wanted to delve in with you anyways and
that'll make a nice piece in and of
itself so let's close this up tell
everybody again the title of your book
the book is called the end of race
politics Arguments for a colorblind
America uh you can buy it on Amazon you
can also listen to me I I I um narrate
it myself on the audible version right
right right so anybody who's interested
in these issues is well advised to take
that up and so well good luck with your
it's continuing sales what are you
what's next you finished a book you're
going around speaking about it that's
obviously occupying a tremendous amount
of your time you made a fory in the
musical direction as well at some point
in the not so uh distant past like
what's on your plate over the next year
or so what are what are you looking
forward to in planning well I I may
write another book on a topic I won't
disclose um but you know in the next
five months in the next three months I
think I'm like many people in our
profession you know covering the
election closely uh both for the free
Free Press uh with Barry Weiss and at
CNN and all my own podcast so that's
probably going to take up the majority
of my time in the next three four months
right tell everybody again about your
podcast too it's called conversations
with Coleman listen to it wherever you
listen to podcast
all right sir all right well thank you
to everybody who is watching and
listening today and uh to the film crew
here up in Northern Ontario um and to
the Daily wire for making these YouTube
conversations possible and well produced
that's also a plus uh join us on the
daily wire side and Coleman and I are
going to delve into the complexities of
the American political situation for
half an hour and that should be very
interesting I very curious about your
take on what has unfolded and what's
likely to unfold in the
next at least the next three months
let's say thank you sir thanks for
having me
[Music]